

===== PAGE 1 =====

Engineering morphogenesis of cell clusters with differentiable programming
Ramya Deshpande,1, ∗Francesco Mottes,1, 2, ∗Ariana-Dalia Vlad,3 Michael P. Brenner,1 and Alma dal Co2
1School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138
2Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
3Harvard College, Cambridge, MA 02138
(Dated: March 3, 2025)
Understanding the rules underlying organismal development is a major unsolved problem in bi-
ology. Each cell in a developing organism responds to signals in its local environment by dividing,
excreting, consuming, or reorganizing, yet how these individual actions coordinate over a macro-
scopic number of cells to grow complex structures with exquisite functionality is unknown. Here
we use recent advances in automatic differentiation to discover local interaction rules and genetic
networks that yield emergent, systems-level characteristics in a model of development. We consider
a growing tissue with cellular interactions mediated by morphogen diffusion, cell adhesion and me-
chanical stress. Each cell has an internal genetic network that is used to make decisions based on the
cell’s local environment. We show that one can learn the parameters governing cell interactions in
the form of interpretable genetic networks for complex developmental scenarios, including directed
axial elongation, cell type homeostasis via chemical signaling and homogenization of growth via
mechanical stress. When combined with recent experimental advances measuring spatio-temporal
dynamics and gene expression of cells in a growing tissue, the methodology outlined here offers a
promising path to unraveling the cellular bases of development.
Morphogenesis, the emergence of distinct anatomical forms from dividing cellular assemblies, hinges on the delicate
coordination of diverse cellular and molecular processes across multiple spatial and temporal scales. Programming
cells to achieve desired morphogenetic outcomes is extremely challenging.
Unlike systems guided by centralized
control signals [1], most developmental complexity arises from the interplay of local communications, sensing, and
information processing within individual cells, with minimal external influence [2]. The emergent nature of collective
cell phenomena, coupled with the complexity of modeling them in adequate detail, imposes severe limits to the
effectiveness of computational approaches to inverse design.
Recent experimental advances offer unprecedented opportunities for morphogenetic engineering [3, 4], enabling the
engineering of tailored cellular interactions, with applications ranging from population control [5] to programming
multicellular assembly patterns [6]. Leveraging the intrinsic self-organizing tendencies of cell clusters has also facili-
tated the production of diverse organoids that mimic multiple aspects of real tissues and organs [7–9]. The ability to
quantitatively guide existing self-organizing developmental programs or engineer novel ones holds significant impli-
cations for both fundamental scientific understanding and biotechnology [10, 11]. Many of these successes, however,
heavily rely on manually crafted and qualitative cellular interaction rules and protocols. Heuristic experimental rules
often exhibit drawbacks, including system specificity, limited robustness, and insufficient reproducibility [12]. De-
veloping more versatile and efficient tools for biological design has the potential to extend the reach and impact of
experimental techniques.
Inverse design tasks are usually translated into optimization problems, wherein the objective is to minimize the
discrepancy between a property of the simulated system state and its desired value. Pioneering research showcased
the potential of using evolutionary algorithms to design genetic networks with specified functions [13]and and gaining
insights into collective developmental cellular behaviors like segmentation [14]. While sophisticated computational
physical models of cell behavior do exist [15, 16], their applicability to reverse engineering remains limited, particularly
in high-dimensional parameter spaces where parameter sweeps and evolutionary searches become inefficient. Auto-
matic differentiation (AD) algorithms, on the other hand, enable efficient calculation of sensitivities of observables
with respect to input parameters. While originally developed for training large neural networks [17, 18], the same
technical infrastructure can be used to differentiate through simulations of physical processes, offering gradient-based
optimization as a viable alternative to tackle hard inverse problems of various scientific interest. Successful exam-
ples include the design of self-assembling materials [19], the establishment of data-driven discretizations for partial
differential equations [20], nonequilibrium statistical mechanics [21] and the design of quantum devices [22]. Neural
Cellular Automata [23] represented an initial demonstration of how these methods could be used to engineer collective
behaviors inspired by biology in lattice models. Hiscock, instead, showed that AD could be used to successfully learn
meaningful couplings in ODE models of genetic networks [24].
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
arXiv:2407.06295v3  [q-bio.CB]  27 Feb 2025


===== PAGE 2 =====

2
Model Overview
a
Gene Networks
Cellular Inputs
stress
c1
c2
division rate
secretion rate of c1
secretion rate of c2
hidden state genes
Wij
gi
gj
Ii
Diffusion
Mechanics
e
Inverse Design
Rewards
Parameters
Simulation
Initial State
Final State
Total Reward
Parameters
Policy 
Gradient
Updated
Parameters
b
c
d
FIG. 1. Modeling and Optimization Framework. (a) Model overview. Decision-making circuits in cells sense local chemical
and mechanical inputs to regulate secretion, division probability, and adhesion. The environment responds to cellular outputs
by handling chemical diffusion, cell division, and mechanical relaxation. (b) Input signals and internal state are integrated and
elaborated in each cell by internal gene regulatory networks. Green gene nodes sense inputs, blue genes are intermediates and
red genes can modify cellular actions. (c) Released chemical factors diffuse in the environment following steady-state diffusion.
(d) Mechanical interactions between cells are modeled with a pairwise Morse potential.
The repulsive region accounts for
volume exclusion forces and the attractive region models cell adhesion. (e) Gradient calculation and optimization. Following
the REINFORCE approach, the log probability gradient of each time step is weighted by action rewards to estimate the average
gradient. Parameters are updated through gradient ascent to maximize the expected reward.
In this study, we consider a tissue model composed of cells capable of division, growth, mechanical stress sensing,
and morphogen excretion and detection. Cellular decisions are driven by responses to the local environment through
an internal genetic network (Fig. 1a). We demonstrate that, starting from random or uninformative initializations,
we can optimize the parameters governing genetic interactions to achieve non-trivial developmental scenarios in cell
clusters. Our examples draw inspiration from various biological processes: axial elongation during limb bud outgrowth,
maintenance of cell type homeostasis through chemical signaling in macrophage-fibroblast co-cultures, and growth
homogenization via chemical signaling and mechanical stress response in the Drosophila wing disc. Our framework
enables the probing of the complex relationship between individual capabilities of proliferating cells and emergent
properties of the resulting tissues.
MODEL AND OPTIMIZATION FRAMEWORK
Forward Model
We model proliferating cells in a tissue with adhesive soft spheres, demonstrating examples of both two- and three-
dimensional systems. While we present specific examples in this paper, our methods are potentially applicable to
various physical models of cell growth and interaction. In our model, cells grow at a fixed rate until reaching a
maximum radius, leading to continuous mechanical reorganization. Cells secrete morphogens, measure local concen-
trations of these chemicals, and sense mechanical stress. This locally sensed information guides decisions on chemical
secretion modulation and division probability (Fig. 1a). Cell division events are stochastic and produce two daugh-
ter cells, each with half the volume of a fully grown mother cell; the division plane is chosen uniformly at random.


===== PAGE 3 =====

3
Decision-making circuits are modeled as regulatory networks comprising interacting genes with trainable excitatory or
inhibitory couplings (Fig. 1b). The regulatory network processes the information sensed by individual cells to output
division propensity, rates of chemical secretion, etc. In most examples, the regulatory network weights are shared
by all cells, though we also explore one scenario where two cell types have separate regulatory networks. Secreted
chemical factors allow information sharing by diffusing in the environment (Fig. 1c). Cells mechanically interact
through a Morse potential (Fig. 1d), with a repulsive part for excluded volume interactions and an attractive part for
cell-cell adhesion [25]. Simulations are conducted for a specific number of cell divisions, so the final state cannot in
general be considered a steady state. Further mathematical detail can be found in the Materials and Methods section
and in the Supplementary Information.
Inverse Design
Our objective is to discover local growth rules that enable cells to develop into a final configuration with desired
properties. To effectively navigate the high-dimensional, non-convex parameter space of local interaction rules, we
employ gradient descent schemes, widely used in modern machine learning for such optimizations. Our entire simula-
tion is written to be automatically differentiable, leveraging recent advances from the deep learning and reinforcement
learning communities. We utilize the JAX library [26] for efficient numerical and automatic differentiation algorithms,
and other JAX-based libraries such as Equinox [27] and JAX-MD [28] for molecular dynamics.
We employ score-based methods such as REINFORCE [29] to address the intrinsic stochasticity of proliferation
dynamics, which implies that the loss function is not directly differentiable (Fig. 1e). In the REINFORCE update,
rewards and penalties are assigned to each action taken (i.e. each cell division) to provide the weighting signal for the
gradient of the trajectory probability. This weighted gradient is then used to nudge the weights of the gene network
in the right direction. In practice, the system gradually learns which division events are the most favorable and
increases their probability for the next simulation. To guide the reader possibly unfamiliar with these concepts, we
also include a set of in-depth tutorial notebooks in the GitHub repository [30] and a longer theoretical explanation in
the Supplementary Information. Since the dynamics of the environment, including chemical secretion and diffusion,
depend partly on the same parameters (the gene network couplings) that cells use to decide whether to divide or
not (their “policy”), it is essential to evaluate the gradient of the environment dynamics with respect to the gene
network parameters. This necessity makes automatic differentiation particularly crucial in this context. Once the
necessary gradients are calculated, optimization is performed using well-established gradient descent schemes, such
as Adam [31]. The learned networks are then further simplified by removing all edges with weights smaller than an
experiment-dependent threshold, such that the functional backbone of pruned network be highlighted while preserving
the system properties we optimized for.
SPATIAL CONTROL OF TISSUE GROWTH
Understanding how to program the growth of complex shapes can aid in our comprehension of developmental body
plans driven by chemical patterning. Rationally designed synthetic gene circuits have been shown to be able to drive
the formation of target multicellular structures found in morphogenesis [6, 32]. We investigate here how to use our
framework to discover decision-making circuits that utilize local chemical interactions to grow target shapes. As an
example, we focus in this section on symmetry-breaking axial elongation. This process is the first geometric-defining
process to happen in many developmental programs and is vital for establishing, for instance, the antero-posterior axis
in animals [33]. We learn a gene circuit that enables cells to chemically interact with a non-proliferating population of
”source cells” to elongate along a given axis. Similar problems have recently been explored by engineering, for example,
contact-based cell communication instead of chemical communication [34, 35]. We consider a three-dimensional model
of dividing cells, that we optimize to minimize the squared sum of the x-coordinates of cells, thus requiring the cluster
to elongate horizontally (Fig. 2a). The system is composed of two different cell types. One secretes a diffusible factor
(source cells, in red in Fig. 2a), but cannot proliferate. The other cell type (in gray in Fig. 2a) can only sense the
factor concentration and modulate its division propensity accordingly. Local chemical concentration is the input to
the proliferating cells’ gene network, allowing them to infer positional information through local physical cues.
The learned mechanism (Fig. 2b) drives a dynamic process reminiscent of limb bud outgrowth in animal develop-
ment. Secretion of the chemical factor by source cells results in a steady-state chemical gradient along the cell cluster
(Fig. 2c). Due to the network’s input-to-output strong inhibitory link, regions of higher chemical concentration,
proximal to the source cells, experience a decrease in the division propensity of proliferating cells. Conversely, areas
with lower chemical concentration experience less inhibition, leading to a sustained higher division propensity located
in the distal region. In the initial spherical cluster, source cells are localized on the left and proliferating cells on


===== PAGE 4 =====

4
activation
inhibition
Initial
Trained
Untrained
X
X
c
d
b
a
Source Cells (No division)
Dividing Cells (No secretion)
FIG. 2. Elongation. Maximization of the squared sum of the x-coordinates of cells, resulting in horizontal elongation in the
optimized cluster. (a) On the left, the final configuration of a simulation with randomly initialized parameters; on the right,
the final simulation state after learning. Source cells (in red) secrete the growth factor and cannot divide. Proliferating cells
(in gray) sense the growth factor and divide in response to it. (b) The learned gene network. The receptor gene is activated
only by the presence of the external chemical factor, which results in repression of the division propensity. Edge boldness is
correlated to connection strength. (c) Chemical gradient created by source cells along the cluster x-coordinate. In the inset, the
same gradient visualized in physical space. (d) Division propensity distribution at the end of the simulation along the x-axis,
highlighting the concentration of dividing cells at the tip.
the right, the latter cells possessing a non-zero initial division propensity. Proliferating cells closer to the source will
experience a diminishing division propensity over time due to the presence of the chemical factor. As these cells
divide, they preferentially expand the cluster in directions of lower chemical concentration, effectively moving away
from the source and further reducing the chemical concentration at the extending tip. This creates a self-reinforcing
loop: cell division events are concentrated at the distal tip where the chemical signal is weakest, ensuring directional
growth and elongation away from the source of the secreted factor (Fig. 2d). Crucially, the weak inhibitory feedback
from division propensity back to chemical input acts as a contrast enhancer, sharpening the division response to
the chemical gradient and producing a ”winner-takes-all“ kind of behavior. In areas of high chemical concentration,
the strong inhibitory forward connection suppresses division, thus diminishing the input suppression by the weaker
feedback connection and leading to even stronger division suppression. Conversely, in regions of low chemical con-
centration where direct inhibition is less prominent, division propensity increases and the weak feedback becomes
functionally significant, further reducing the perceived chemical input. This effect amplifies the division propensity
output specifically in these low-concentration regions. The positive self-loop on division propensity further stabilizes
and amplify this directional growth by sustaining high division rates in the low-concentration tip regions, and working
in synergy with the contrast-enhancing feedback to create a robust and spatially well-defined elongation.
While significantly simplified compared to biochemical networks governing directional growth, the learned architec-
ture functionally recapitulates the core logic of some developmental processes. Like limb bud outgrowth, it achieves
directional elongation through localized growth at the tip [36]. Unlike the growth-promoting signaling factors (like
FGF) secreted by the Apical Ectodermal Ridge, though, it employs an inhibitory regulatory signal originating from
the base to restrict proximal proliferation and promote growth at the distal end. This regulation is learned consis-
tently in all our optimization runs. The lack of alternative mechanisms (e.g. maintaining a proliferating zone close
to the source cells) might be due to different reasons, like the particular mechanical properties chosen to simulate the


===== PAGE 5 =====

5
activation
inhibition
Type 2
Type 1
S(c2)
S(c1)
R(c2)
R(c1)
R(c1)
R(c2)
Chem. 1
Initial
Trained
Untrained
a
b
c
d
e
Cell Type 1
Cell Type 2
Chem. 2
Division
Secr. Chem. 1
Chem. 1
Chem. 2
Division
Secr. Chem. 2
INPUTS
OUTPUTS
Network Variants:
2/15 Optimizations
7/15 Optimizations
6/15 Optimizations
FIG. 3. Chemical Regulation of Homeostasis. (a) Two cell types each exclusively secrete a chemical factor that can
be sensed by both cell types.
(b) Visualization of the learned gene networks.
Interactions in black are present in every
learned network.
Colored interactions are single variants that are present only in a subset of learned solutions, with the
reported frequency. This gives three type 1 network variants and two type 2 variants, totaling to 6 possible overall regulatory
combinations. Edge boldness is correlated to connection strength. (c) An initially imbalanced state (in the middle) grows into
an equally unbalanced final state with untrained network parameters (left) and into a balanced state with learned parameters
(right) (d) Average over 100 realizations of final proportion of red cells at the end of simulations of increasing lengths. (e)
Average over 100 realizations of final proportion of red cells at the end of simulations with increasing proportions of red cells
in the starting state. In both plots the shaded area corresponds to average plus or minus one standard deviation.
system, the absence of external geometric constraints or the specific reward function chosen.
CHEMICAL REGULATION OF TISSUE HOMEOSTASIS
Maintaining stable ratios of different cell populations is crucial for tissue function, and disruptions of this balance
can lead to disease [37]. To maintain these stable proportions, cellular circuits must prevent uncontrolled growth of
any single cell type. Cell communication mediated by diffusible factors constitutes a key mechanism for achieving
tissue homeostasis and regulating tissue composition.
One prominent example is the interplay between osteoblasts and osteoclasts in bone homeostasis [38].
Bone-
forming osteoblasts primarily secrete RANKL, which promotes osteoclast differentiation and activation. Conversely,
osteoclasts secrete their own factors (like S1P) and release bone matrix factors (e.g. TGF-β) during bone resorption,
influencing osteoblast abundance. This reciprocal signaling establishes a feedback loop that maintains the balance
between bone formation and resorption. Similar phenomena are also observed in vitro. For instance, co-cultures of
macrophages and fibroblasts can spontaneously reach stable ratios, even from highly imbalanced starting conditions
[39]. Both cell types secrete growth factors that selectively stimulate the growth of the other: macrophages primarily
produce PDGF and fibroblasts secrete Csf1, while other diffusible factors contribute to self-regulation of growth.
Cell-to-cell chemical communication via diffusible factors has also been shown to be crucial for regulating homeostasis
during cell differentiation [40, 41].
Inspired by the macrophage-fibroblast system in particular, we investigated chemical mechanisms capable of main-
taining a balanced 50/50 ratio between two cell types in a growing cluster. In this 2D model, two cell types interact
chemically, each secreting a distinct chemical factor (Fig. 3a). Cell behavior is governed by cell-type-specific genetic
networks, learned through optimization, which regulate division propensity and secretion of diffusible factors (Fig.


===== PAGE 6 =====

6
3b). As shown in Fig 3c (center), simulations begin with an imbalanced initial state, comprising nr = 4 red cells (cell
type 1) and nb = 16 blue cells (cell type 2). The untrained network is initialized to yield uniform division propensities:
after 100 cell divisions, the initial imbalance is found again in the final state (Fig 3c, left). The learned mechanisms,
instead, successfully yield balanced cell type populations at the end of the simulation. Gene couplings are optimized
to minimize the number difference between the two cell types during growth (Fig 3c, right).
Lt = |nr(t) −nb(t)|
is the loss at time t, where nr and nb are the number of red and blue cells respectively, and nr + nb = N is the total
cell number.
The learned networks for each cell type are shown in Fig. 3b. Both cell types sense both chemicals, but each
modulates the secretion of its own factor only. We focus first on the connections in black in the figure, representing
the core ”backbone” network consistently learned across optimization runs and sufficient for homeostasis. As expected,
the strongest effects (bold in Figure 3b) link input chemicals to proliferation regulation, in a mirrored manner across
cell types. In both cell types, chemical secreted by the same type inhibits division, while chemical secreted from the
other type promotes it. Secretion control in both cell types is governed solely by chemical factor 1, associated with
the initially less abundant red cell type. In cell type 1, chemical 1 simply enhances its own production. In cell type 2,
secretion regulation is less straightforward: chemical 1 inhibits secretion of chemical 2, and high secretion of chemical
2 contribute to proliferation suppression.
Consider a region where type 2 cells are surrounded by their own type, levels of chemical 1 are low and chemical 2
is secreted at a basal rate. In this case, the lack of chemical 1 removes suppression of chemical 2 secretion, resulting
in higher chemical 2 levels.
High levels of chemical 2 and strong secretion activate division inhibitory pathways
for type 2, halting proliferation.
Conversely, when sensed levels of chemical 1 rise due to increased division of
cell type 1, the inhibition of chemical 2 secretion is lifted, eliminating in turn the secondary inhibitory feedback on
proliferation. Simultaneously, the strong positive regulatory connection between chemical 1 and division promotes type
2 proliferation. Increased type 2 division and secretion of chemical 2 again activates the inhibitory division pathways,
and the cycle repeats. Notably, spatial structure plays a key role: cell divisions place daughter cells near parent cells,
altering neighborhood cell type composition. This increases the local concentration of the self-secreted chemical and,
at the same time, decreases the concentration of the other chemical as cells move away from surrounding sources.
Despite model differences, the learned solutions share key features with the macrophage-fibroblast homeostasis circuit
reported in [39]. Both systems feature mutual proliferation promotion between the two cell types and negative growth
self-regulation. Furthermore, also in this case one of the two factors negatively regulate the other.
Beyond the most common networks, optimization also identifies two alternatives for cell type 1 and one for cell type
2. These variants differ from the most frequent architecture by single additional edges (colored differently in Figure
3b). Network variants are not correlated between cell types and can appear in any of the six possible combinations.
The weaker additional links enhance existing dynamical behaviors without fundamentally altering network function.
Their presence may reflect optimization convergence to local minima or variations in convergence speed, rather than
specific functional advantages.
Remarkably, the learned gene regulations exhibit robustness and generalization beyond the explicit optimization
goals. If one fixes the initial imbalance to the one used during training (nr/N = 0.2), the learned regulation maintains
homeostasis even in extended simulations far beyond the training duration of 100 divisions, showing no degradation
(Fig. 3d). Furthermore, maintaining 100 cell divisions but varying the initial proportions of cell types, homeostasis
is reasonably maintained up to nearly twice the initial imbalance (Fig. 3e). Beyond this point, the regulatory circuit
starts to overcompensate and loses its advantage over random cell divisions. This behavior aligns with the regulatory
asymmetry observed in the discovered networks, reflecting the fact that all initial simulation states during optimization
are imbalanced in the same direction (i.e. with more blue cells than red ones). We suppose that the initial tissue state
results from an upstream cell differentiation process which does not produce completely random cell type proportions,
so having no initial variability seems like a reasonable approximating assumption.
MECHANICAL CONTROL OF CELL PROLIFERATION
Mechanical signaling plays a crucial role in morphogenesis, influencing both individual cells and tissue-level pro-
cesses. At the cellular level, mechanosensation affects gene expression through various biochemical pathways that
transduce forces [42]. On a broader scale, mechanical signals convey local instructions to shape global structures
[42–45]. In tissues, mechanical interactions can operate over larger distances than biochemical signals due to tension
propagation through connected cells [45]. Furthermore, the accumulation of local mechanical stress can impact the
global growth of developing structures. For instance, mechanical feedback has been proposed as a mechanism for


===== PAGE 7 =====

7
training field
new field
Final CV
Density
Model Input Ablations
a
b
c
d
e
R
Division Field
field
two peak exp off center
trained
untrained
power law
Chem. 1
Secr. Chem. 1
Division
Chem. 2
Mechanical
Stress
Secr. Chem. 2
FIG. 4. Mechano-chemical Regulation of Homogeneous Growth. (a) Scheme of the problem setup, inspired by wing
disc growth in Drosophila. The extrinsic division scaling mirrors the experimentally observed tendency of cells to divide in the
center of the cluster. (b) The learned gene network. Division is controlled both by the external division field (left implicit
in the diagram) and by the other cell inputs. Edge boldness is correlated to connection strength. (c) Proliferation regulation
learned in a power-law division field yield lower coefficient of variation of division propensities also in systems with different
proliferation biases. Left to right: the power-law field used in training, a field with two peaks instead of one, an exponential
field, and a field with an off-center peak. Distributions are calculated over 100 simulations. (d) Ablation studies assess the
importance of both mechanical and chemical regulation. Separately removing chemical or mechanical feedback leads to more
proliferation heterogeneity with respect to the presence of both.(e) Division rate divided by the extrinsic division field is plotted
for each kind of simulation in panel (c). This shows that cells regulate division probabilities by adapting to the shape of the
extrinsic division field.
growth arrest in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc [46, 47]. In this study, we explore these concepts by optimizing a
model inspired by the Drosophila wing disc development to uncover mechanisms that couple mechanics to growth.
Our model incorporates a constant radial growth factor gradient that modulates division propensity, with cells closer
to the cluster center having a higher probability of division (Fig. 4a). This aligns with experimental observations of
transiently faster growth rates in central cells during early wing disc development [48]. This extrinsic division scaling,
fixed throughout the simulation, follows a power-law decay. The total division propensity of cell i is given by:
di = gi(stress, chemicals) ∗f(r)
where gi(stress, chemicals) is the division output of the internal gene network and f(r) ∝1/r2 is the radial scaling
due to the external factor.
As the cell cluster expands, each cell modulates its division propensity through their internal gene circuit, receiving
sensed chemicals and stress as inputs. We aim to identify local growth rules that achieve homogeneous proliferation
throughout the cluster despite the nonuniform effect of the external factor gradient. This optimization for uniform
growth rates is inspired by experimental evidence, showing similar growth rates across different regions of the wing
disc during most of its development, despite small-scale local variations [48].
We optimize couplings between genes in the circuit to minimize the coefficient of variation of division propensities:
L = CV[d(T)] = σ[d(T)]
µ[d(T)]


===== PAGE 8 =====

8
where d(T) are the division propensities at final time T.
The optimized gene circuit utilizes both chemical and mechanical information to modulate division propensity (Fig.
4b). This regulation leads to a significantly lower CV of cells’ division rates (Fig. 4c). Remarkably, the gene circuit
optimized on the power law gradient successfully reduces growth variations also when exposed to external division
scaling fields unseen during training. To assess the robustness of the mechanism, we expose the trained gene circuit to
different external gradients: an exponentially decaying gradient, a gradient with two symmetric peaks, and a gradient
with a single asymmetric peak.(Fig. 4c, left panel).
While simplified, our model parallels several phenomena observed in experimental studies of wing disc growth
regulation and captures the essence of mechanical feedback in growth regulation. In the learned network, mechanical
stress directly inhibits cell division, mirroring the role of the Hippo pathway in the wing disc.
Experimentally,
mechanical stress has been shown to activate the Hippo pathway [48], leading to Warts-mediated phosphorylation and
inactivation of the growth-promoting transcription co-activator Yorkie (Yki), ultimately suppressing cell proliferation.
Conversely, reduced mechanical stress allows Yki to remain unphosphorylated, enter the nucleus, and drive cell
proliferation necessary for proper tissue growth and development. Our model represents a coarse-grained version of
this mechanism through the inhibition of division propensity by the stress-sensing gene.
Although the secreted factors in our model lack direct biological counterparts, they serve as a simplified abstraction
of the complex chemical signaling networks coordinating growth control in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc. The
incorporation of secreted factors for feedback regulation conceptually represents the broader principle of growth control
via morphogen gradients in the wing disc. For instance, the Decapentaplegic (Dpp) and Wingless (Wg) proteins
form concentration gradients across the anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral axes respectively, regulating growth and
patterning [48]. While not direct analogues of these specific morphogens, our model’s diffusible factors capture the
essence of spatially distributed chemical signals that influence growth patterns. The importance of these factors is
further demonstrated in Fig. 4d, where we compare the performance of circuits with ablated inputs. Removing
the chemical factors significantly impairs the cluster’s self-regulation capabilities, confirming that both chemical and
mechanical regulation are essential in this context. Moreover, the gene network outputs appear to track both the
shape of the fields and patterns of stress accumulation (Fig. 4e, Supp Fig. S6c), consistent with a mechanical feedback
mechanism.
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
We report in the Supplementary Information a set of additional experimental setups that we omitted from the
main text to focus on the most biologically relevant findings. We provide here a brief summary of such examples,
to further stress the flexibility of our method and possibly inspire further applications. When cells have access to
estimates of chemical gradients constructed by communicating with nearest neighbors, they can learn to elongate in
one direction (Fig. S2) and grow in a branched shape (Fig. S3) by only including a single cell type. In these cases they
learn to create emergent chemical gradients without the need for external asymmetric sources and show remarkable
robustness to cell removal. We also show that, besides chemical secretion and division propensity, we can endow cells
with control over their adhesion strength. By regulating a set of homotypic and heterotypic “cadherins”, cells can
learn basic assembly programs for checkerboard, lobed and core-shell structures (Fig S1).
DISCUSSION
Our results demonstrate the power of gradient-based optimization methods in discovering mechanisms within the
space of physical models for collective cell behavior. By taking gradients through a physical model of interacting cells
written using automatically differentiable code, we were able to learn decision-making programs within individual
cells to orchestrate growth into target shapes or with other target properties. We were able to overcome challenges
associated with differentiating through the discrete nature of cell division events and non-differentiable loss functions
with an approach based on classic reinforcement learning. The mechanisms that were learned took the form of gene
regulatory networks, which readily offer a physical and biological interpretation. The learned mechanisms were local
in nature: cells did not have access to global information (e.g. their absolute position) and had to infer it instead by
sensing chemicals and mechanics and communicating with nearby cells through these physical channels.
The gene networks optimized here could be substituted with more detailed biophysical models or constrained to
incorporate prior biological knowledge. Furthermore, the soft sphere model we have presented here is simply one of
the possible choices. The physical details can be modified to optimize over an alternative bespoke forward model
with the same methods we demonstrated in this work. Questions about minimal mechanisms, robustness to variation
and perturbations, number of unique solutions or growth principles could also be framed and investigated within the


===== PAGE 9 =====

9
same setting.
Our results are a promising first step towards inferring mechanisms in existing multicellular systems or learning how
to program them for desired behaviors. In particular, morphogenetic mechanisms frequently utilize local feedback
to coordinate intricate forms, often through chemical or mechanical signals. Examples include a myriad of devel-
opmental systems, from the development of the wing imaginal disc in Drosophila to the periodic segmentation of
blocks in somitogenesis.
The development of robust and useful organoid systems also requires an understanding
of spatiotemporal chemical and physical cues needed to guide the growth of stem cells. Physical models could be
optimized to reproduce experimental data from time-lapse imaging of such developmental systems to gain insights
into individual decision making functions that recapitulate complex behaviors. Gene expression datasets could be
incorporated to bridge the gap between known and unknown information in biological systems. Maximization or
minimization principles could be explored beyond simplified models. Our work opens up a multitude of avenues for
further explorations of the landscape of growth programs for desired emergent behaviors in living systems.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fully differentiable, hardware-accelerated simulations were coded using the JAX python library [26] and other
libraries in the JAX ecosystem. In particular, JAX-MD [28] was used to perform molecular dynamics simulations for
cell mechanics and Equinox [27] as the simulation backbone.
We proceed to give a very succinct overview of the main components of our model. A full mathematical account of
simulation and optimization details is given in the Supplementary Information.
Cell division and growth
Each cell i is endowed with a division propensity di calculated by the internal gene network. One cell divides at
each time step, with probability:
P(i divides) =
di
P
i di
The division substitutes one mature cell with two newborn cells with half the volume. The angular orientation of the
division plan is chosen uniformly at random.
Cells’ radii Ri grow linearly in time up to a maximum radius Rmax:
Ri(t + ∆t) = min(Ri(t) + ∆R, Rmax)
Mechanical interactions
Cells are modeled as adhesive soft spheres. Interactions are defined by the Morse energy potential:
Vij(r) = ϵij
h
1 −e−αij(rij−σij)i2
−ϵij
where ϵij is the well depth for the potential between particle i and j, αij is the range of interaction, σij is the sum of
radii of particles i and j, and rij is the distance between the two particles.
Diffusion
We assume that chemicals diffuse freely in the environment and are taken up by cells at a constant rate. It is also
assumed that diffusion is much faster than all other processes and can be therefore be considered at steady state. For
any one chemical k:


===== PAGE 10 =====

10
∂ck
∂t = Dk∇2ck −Kkck + Sk = 0
The equation is discretized and solved on the lattice formed by the cells’ centers with the graph Laplacian technique.
Genetic regulatory interactions
We model internal cell decision functions with a simple ODE model of gene regulation inspired by Hiscock [24]:
dgi
dt = ϕ(ΣjWijgj + bi) + Ii −kigi
Considering the i-th gene, gi is the expression level, Wij is the regulatory influence of gene j on i, bi determines the
gene transcription rate in absence of regulation, ki is the degradation rate, and Ii is a forcing signal coming from one
of the sensed cell inputs. ϕ is a sigmoid function that ensures positive transcription rates saturating at high input
levels.
Gradient calculation
Due to the presence of discrete stochastic events, the gradients of simulations involving cell division events cannot
be calculated by direct application of the chain rule. Following REINFORCE [29], we can estimate the gradient of
the expected loss for a single simulation:
∇θL(θ) ≈
T −1
X
t=0
Lt∇θ log πθ(at|st)
where Lt is the discounted future loss, θ represents the trainable gene network parameters and π is the probability of
the division event parametrized by θ.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is dedicated to the memory of Alma Dal Co. We thank for insightful discussions: the members of the
Brenner Group, the members of the former Dal Co group, Boris Shraiman and Dillon Cislo. R.D. thanks Herv´e
Turlier for helpful discussions. This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research through grant numbers ONR
N00014-17-1-3029, ONR N00014-23-1-2654 and the NSF AI Institute of Dynamic Systems (2112085).
DATA AVAILABILITY
The custom library written to conduct this study is available at https://github.com/fmottes/jax-morph/, along
with tutorial notebooks.
[1] M. Rubenstein, A. Cornejo, and R. Nagpal, Programmable self-assembly in a thousand-robot swarm, Science 345, 795
(2014).
[2] C. Collinet and T. Lecuit, Programmed and self-organized flow of information during morphogenesis, Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biology 22, 245 (2021).
[3] J. Davies, Using synthetic biology to explore principles of development, Development (Cambridge, England) 144, 1146
(2017).
[4] J. J. Velazquez, E. Su, P. Cahan, and M. R. Ebrahimkhani, Programming Morphogenesis through Systems and Synthetic
Biology, Trends in biotechnology 36, 415 (2018).


===== PAGE 11 =====

11
[5] Y. Ma, M. W. Budde, M. N. Mayalu, J. Zhu, A. C. Lu, R. M. Murray, and M. B. Elowitz, Synthetic mammalian signaling
circuits for robust cell population control, Cell 185, 967 (2022).
[6] S. Toda, W. L. McKeithan, T. J. Hakkinen, P. Lopez, O. D. Klein, and W. A. Lim, Engineering synthetic morphogen
systems that can program multicellular patterning, Science (New York, N.Y.) 370, 327 (2020).
[7] M. A. Lancaster, N. S. Corsini, S. Wolfinger, E. H. Gustafson, A. Phillips, T. R. Burkard, T. Otani, F. J. Livesey, and
J. A. Knoblich, Guided self-organization and cortical plate formation in human brain organoids, Nature biotechnology 35,
659 (2017).
[8] A. Lewis, R. Keshara, Y. H. Kim, and A. Grapin-Botton, Self-organization of organoids from endoderm-derived cells,
Journal of Molecular Medicine 99, 449 (2021).
[9] J. A. Brassard and M. P. Lutolf, Engineering Stem Cell Self-organization to Build Better Organoids, Cell Stem Cell 24,
860 (2019).
[10] M. M. Sthijns, V. L. LaPointe, and C. A. van Blitterswijk, Building Complex Life Through Self-Organization, Tissue
Engineering. Part A 25, 1341 (2019).
[11] S. Werner, H. T.-K. Vu, and J. C. Rink, Self-organization in development, regeneration and organoids, Current Opinion
in Cell Biology Cell Architecture, 44, 102 (2017).
[12] M. Hofer and M. P. Lutolf, Engineering organoids, Nature Reviews Materials 6, 402 (2021).
[13] P. Fran¸cois and V. Hakim, Design of genetic networks with specified functions by evolution in silico, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101, 580 (2004).
[14] P. Fran¸cois, V. Hakim, and E. D. Siggia, Deriving structure from evolution: metazoan segmentation, Molecular systems
biology 3, 154 (2007).
[15] J. M. Osborne, A. G. Fletcher, J. M. Pitt-Francis, P. K. Maini, and D. J. Gavaghan, Comparing individual-based approaches
to modelling the self-organization of multicellular tissues, PLoS Computational Biology 13, e1005387 (2017).
[16] S. Runser, R. Vetter, and D. Iber, Simucell3d: three-dimensional simulation of tissue mechanics with cell polarization,
Nature Computational Science 4, 299 (2024).
[17] R. Anil, A. M. Dai, O. Firat, M. Johnson, D. Lepikhin, A. Passos, S. Shakeri, E. Taropa, P. Bailey, Z. Chen, et al., Palm
2 technical report, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403 (2023).
[18] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell,
et al., Language models are few-shot learners, Advances in neural information processing systems 33, 1877 (2020).
[19] C. P. Goodrich, E. M. King, S. S. Schoenholz, E. D. Cubuk, and M. P. Brenner, Designing self-assembling kinetics with
differentiable statistical physics models, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, e2024083118 (2021).
[20] Y. Bar-Sinai, S. Hoyer, J. Hickey, and M. P. Brenner, Learning data-driven discretizations for partial differential equations,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 15344 (2019).
[21] M. C. Engel, J. A. Smith, and M. P. Brenner, Optimal control of nonequilibrium systems through automatic differentiation,
Physical Review X 13, 041032 (2023).
[22] R. A. Vargas-Hern´andez, R. T. Q. Chen, K. A. Jung, and P. Brumer, Fully differentiable optimization protocols for
non-equilibrium steady states, New Journal of Physics 23, 123006 (2021).
[23] A. Mordvintsev, E. Randazzo, E. Niklasson, and M. Levin, Growing Neural Cellular Automata, Distill 5, e23 (2020).
[24] T. W. Hiscock, Adapting machine-learning algorithms to design gene circuits, BMC Bioinformatics 20, 214 (2019).
[25] H. Koyama, H. Okumura, A. M. Ito, K. Nakamura, T. Otani, K. Kato, and T. Fujimori, Effective mechanical potential
of cell–cell interaction explains three-dimensional morphologies during early embryogenesis, PLOS Computational Biology
19, e1011306 (2023), publisher: Public Library of Science.
[26] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas,
S. Wanderman-Milne, and Q. Zhang, JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs (2018).
[27] P. Kidger and C. Garcia, Equinox: neural networks in JAX via callable PyTrees and filtered transformations, Differentiable
Programming workshop at Neural Information Processing Systems 2021 (2021).
[28] S. S. Schoenholz and E. D. Cubuk, Jax m.d. a framework for differentiable physics, in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, Vol. 33 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2020).
[29] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, 2nd ed. (The MIT Press, 2018).
[30] https://github.com/fmottes/jax-morph/tree/eqx/tutorials (2024), accessed: 2024-07-06.
[31] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization (2017), arXiv:1412.6980 [cs].
[32] Y. Guo, M. Nitzan, and M. P. Brenner, Programming cell growth into different cluster shapes using diffusible signals,
PLOS Computational Biology 17, e1009576 (2021).
[33] S. Darras, J. H. Fritzenwanker, K. R. Uhlinger, E. Farrelly, A. M. Pani, I. A. Hurley, R. P. Norris, M. Osovitz, M. Terasaki,
M. Wu, J. Aronowicz, M. Kirschner, J. C. Gerhart, and C. J. Lowe, Anteroposterior axis patterning by early canonical
wnt signaling during hemichordate development, PLoS Biology 16, e2003698 (2018).
[34] C. Lam, S. Saluja, G. Courcoubetis, D. Yu, C. Chung, J. Courte, and L. Morsut, Parameterized computational framework
for the description and design of genetic circuits of morphogenesis based on contact-dependent signaling and changes in
cell-cell adhesion, ACS synthetic biology 11, 1417 (2022).
[35] J. Courte, C. Chung, N. Jain, C. Salazar, N. Phuchane, S. Grosser, C. Lam, and L. Morsut, Programming the elongation
of mammalian cell aggregates with synthetic gene circuits, bioRxiv , 2024.12.11.627621 (2024).
[36] B. Boehm, H. Westerberg, G. Lesnicar-Pucko, S. Raja, M. Rautschka, J. Cotterell, J. Swoger, and J. Sharpe, The role of
spatially controlled cell proliferation in limb bud morphogenesis, PLoS biology 8, e1000420 (2010).
[37] J. Hicks-Berthet, B. Ning, A. Federico, A. Tilston-Lunel, A. Matschulat, X. Ai, M. E. Lenburg, J. Beane, S. Monti, and
X. Varelas, Yap/taz inhibit goblet cell fate to maintain lung epithelial homeostasis, Cell Reports 36, 109347 (2021).


===== PAGE 12 =====

12
[38] J. M. Kim, C. Lin, Z. Stavre, M. B. Greenblatt, and J. H. Shim, Osteoblast-osteoclast communication and bone homeostasis,
Cells 9, 2073 (2020).
[39] X. Zhou, R. A. Franklin, M. Adler, J. B. Jacox, W. Bailis, J. A. Shyer, R. A. Flavell, A. Mayo, U. Alon, and R. Medzhitov,
Circuit Design Features of a Stable Two-Cell System, Cell 172, 744 (2018), publisher: Elsevier.
[40] N. Saiz, L. Mora-Bitria, S. Rahman, H. George, J. P. Herder, J. Garcia-Ojalvo, and A. K. Hadjantonakis, Growth-factor-
mediated coupling between lineage size and cell fate choice underlies robustness of mammalian development, eLife 9, e56079
(2020).
[41] D. Raina, A. Bahadori, A. Stanoev, M. Protzek, A. Koseska, and C. Schr¨oter, Cell-cell communication through FGF4
generates and maintains robust proportions of differentiated cell types in embryonic stem cells, Development 148, dev199926
(2021).
[42] P. Agarwal and R. Zaidel-Bar, Mechanosensing in embryogenesis, Current Opinion in Cell Biology Cell Architecture, 68,
1 (2021).
[43] K. D. Irvine and B. I. Shraiman, Mechanical control of growth: ideas, facts and challenges, Development 144, 4238 (2017).
[44] D.-C. Trinh, J. Alonso-Serra, M. Asaoka, L. Colin, M. Cortes, A. Malivert, S. Takatani, F. Zhao, J. Traas, C. Trehin, and
O. Hamant, How Mechanical Forces Shape Plant Organs, Current biology: CB 31, R143 (2021).
[45] L. LeGoff, H. Rouault, and T. Lecuit, A global pattern of mechanical stress polarizes cell divisions and cell shape in the
growing Drosophila wing disc, Development 140, 4051 (2013).
[46] B. I. Shraiman, Mechanical feedback as a possible regulator of tissue growth, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 102, 3318 (2005), publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
[47] L. Hufnagel, A. A. Teleman, H. Rouault, S. M. Cohen, and B. I. Shraiman, On the mechanism of wing size determination
in fly development, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, 3835 (2007), publisher: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.
[48] B. K. Tripathi and K. D. Irvine, The wing imaginal disc, Genetics 220, iyac020 (2022).


===== PAGE 13 =====

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Engineering morphogenesis of cell clusters with differentiable programming
Ramya Deshpande∗, Francesco Mottes∗, Ariana-Dalia Vlad, Michael Brenner and Alma Dal Co
CONTENTS
I. Forward Simulation
2
Cell Growth
2
Mechanical Interactions
2
Cell Division
2
Diffusion
3
Chemical Gradients
4
Mechanical Stress
4
Gene Networks
4
II. The REINFORCE Optimization Algorithm
4
A. Underlying Theory
4
Markov Decision Processes
4
Policy Gradients Theorem
5
Monte Carlo Estimation
6
Parameters Update Rule
6
Baseline for Variance Reduction
6
B. Optimization of Cell Divisions
6
III. Additional Results
7
Chemical Regulation of Cellular Adhesion
7
Elongation (Single cell type)
8
Branching
8
IV. Experiment Details
10
Chemical Regulation of Cellular Adhesion
10
Elongation (Two cell types)
10
Elongation (Single cell type)
11
Branching
11
Chemical Homeostasis
11
Mechanical Control of Cell Proliferation
14
V. Scaling of Optimization Performance with Model Complexity
16
References
17
arXiv:2407.06295v3  [q-bio.CB]  27 Feb 2025


===== PAGE 14 =====

2
I.
FORWARD SIMULATION
We run simulations using JAX-MD [1], a molecular dynamics engine built using the automatic differentiation
framework JAX [2]. Cells are particles instantiated in ”free” space, with a set of properties represented by a CellState
datatype; this object contains the position of particles, their radii, division propensities, chemical concentrations at
the center of each cell and any additional state information appropriate for a simulation (for example: stress, finite
difference gradients of the chemical concentrations, etc.). At the start of the simulation, arrays of size (T, n + T,
Dim) are instantiated for each property in CellState, where T is the number of timesteps, n is the initial number of
cells, and Dim is the dimension of the cell property (2D or 3D). Each simulation timestep consists of one cell division,
so the final configuration will contain N = n + T cells.
To create an initial state with n cells, we place a cell at the origin, and run n −1 iterations of cell division, cell
growth, and mechanical relaxation to generate a cluster of the desired initial size. All division propensities are equal
in the initial state, so each cell is chosen to divide with equal probability, generating a radially symmetric cluster. The
actual simulation can be customized to contain any subset or combination of the steps detailed below; the specifics of
the simulation used for each instantiation in the main text is detailed in the Experimental Details section. The code
used for the simulations can be found in the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/fmottes/jax-morph.
Cell Growth
All cell radii grow constantly in time, up to a specified maximum radius Rmax:
Ri(t + ∆t) = min(Ri(t) + ∆R, Rmax)
This operation can also be made differentiable if necessary, by means of a suitable smoothing function in place of
the hard min operation.
Mechanical Interactions
Cells mechanically interact with one another via a pairwise Morse potential. The potential has a minimum at
a distance defined by the sum of the two interacting cells’ radii. It is very repulsive at shorter distances (volume-
exclusion interactions) and slightly attractive at longer distances (cell-cell adhesion). The range of attraction, the
strength of the exclusion and the stiffness of the interaction can be modified by changing the potential parameters.
Relaxation is performed by gradient descent energy minimization of the Morse potential for a fixed number of steps
(except in the case where we learn cell adhesion). The pairwise potential is defined by the following expression:
Vij(r) = ϵij
h
1 −e−αij(rij−σij)i2
−ϵij
where ϵij is the well depth for the potential between particle i and j, αij is the range of interaction, σij is the sum
of radii of particles i and j, and rij is the distance between the two particles. In most simulations, we assume for
simplicity that αij = α and ϵij = ϵ. This need not be the case in general. In particular, in the example where we learn
the regulation of cell-to-cell adhesion, the values of ϵij are determined by the cells’ internal regulatory mechanisms.
Cell Division
Each cell i is endowed with a division propensity di calculated by the internal gene network and stored in the
CellState. One cell divides at each time step, with probability:
P(i divides) =
di
P
j dj
A cell i is first randomly chosen to divide with these probabilities. A random direction is then selected as θ ∈[0, 2π].
The positions of the daughter cells are calculated as:


===== PAGE 15 =====

3
¯r1,x = ¯r0,x + Rbirthcos(θ), ¯r1,y = ¯r0,y + Rbirthsin(θ)
(1)
¯r2,x = ¯r0,x −Rbirthcos(θ), ¯r2,y = ¯r0,y −Rbirthsin(θ)
(2)
where (¯r1,x, ¯r1,y) and (¯r2,x, ¯r2,y) are the positions of the daughter cells, (¯r0,x, ¯r0,y) is the position of the mother cell
and Rbirth is fixed as the radius of newly born cells. Each daughter cell inherits all other properties of its mother cell.
Diffusion
We assume that chemicals diffuse freely in the environment and are taken up by cells at a constant rate. It is also
assumed that diffusion is much faster than all other processes and can be therefore be considered at steady state.
Concentrations of a chemical k (in arbitrary units) at each cell site are determined by the following equation:
∂ck
∂t = Dk∇2ck −Kkck + Sk = 0
The equation is discretized and solved on the lattice formed by the cells’ centers with the graph Laplacian technique.
The PDE above is first reformulated by substituting the diffusion operator with the discrete graph Laplacian L. This
results in a linear system of ODEs for each chemical, describing the concentration of a chemical on each lattice site.
The equation is then solved for the steady state concentrations {ck}:
∂ck
∂t = DkLck −Kkck + Sk = 0
Dk is the diffusion coefficient of chemical k and Kk is the uptake rate for chemical k, the same for every cell for
simplicity. Sk is an N x 1 vector of secretion rates of chemical k by every cell, calculated by the gene networks. ck is
an N x 1 vector containing the concentration of chemical k at all cell sites. The discrete graph Laplacian operator is
constructed as:
L = deg(A) −A
where A is the adjacency matrix that describes the connections between the discrete spatial sites. deg(A) is a matrix
that has the sum of A’s rows (that is, the node degrees) as diagonal elements and is zero everywhere else. For all cells
i:
{deg(A)}ii =
N
X
j=0
Aij
Apart from the branching and homogeneous growth examples, we construct the graph Laplacian to simulate diffusion
in a closed system with reflecting boundary conditions. In this case the adjacency matrix A is calculated as the inverse
of the pairwise distance between every pair of cells:
Aij =
1
dist(i, j) =
1
∥¯ri −¯rj∥
In order to simulate permeable boundaries without the additional burden of having a higher resolution lattice only
for chemical diffusion, we adopt an approximate approach. We now construct the adjacency matrix by connecting
cells that are nearest neighbors with an edge of weight 1 (that is approximately their distance) and zero otherwise:
Aij =
(
1
if dist(i, j) ≤Ri + Rj
0,
otherwise
We then heuristically detect the nodes that are on the boundaries of the cluster by looking at the number of nodes
they are connected to. We connect all of these boundary nodes to a ghost sink node that receives and dissipates
chemicals, to simulate the effect of chemicals lost in the medium surrounding the cluster. In practice, this is done by
adding, in the degree matrix, an extra unit of degree to the nodes on the boundary.


===== PAGE 16 =====

4
Chemical Gradients
Multicellular collectives can infer weak concentration gradients across the collective through individual cells mea-
suring differences in chemical concentrations across their diameters [3]. To achieve such an estimate of the spatial
gradient of chemical k sensed by cell j, a unit vector pointing to each nearest neighbor i of cell j is scaled by the
concentration of chemical k in those cells, and the the contributions from all neighbors are summed up:
∇ck(¯rj) ≈
X
i∈nn(j)
ck(¯ri) ¯ri −¯rj
∥¯ri −¯rj∥
(3)
Here, ¯ri is the position of cell i, and ck(¯ri) is the concentration of chemical k at position ¯ri.
Mechanical Stress
As a proxy for the mechanical stress exerted by cell i on cell j in our 2D environment, the component-wise force
on i by j, (Fij,x, Fij,y), is multiplied by the component-wise unit vector pointing from j to i, (¯rj,x −¯ri,x, ¯rj,y −¯ri,y);
this is summed over the components. For cell i we compute:
σi = Σj

Fij,x · ¯rj,x −¯ri,x
|¯rj,x −¯ri,x| + Fij,y · ¯rj,y −¯ri,y
|¯rj,y −¯ri,y|

This formulation allows for differentiation between compressive and tensile forces.
Gene Networks
Methods presented in Hiscock et al. [4] are adapted to model N genes that can interact with each other, with
the sign of the interaction term determining whether it is an activating or inhibitory coupling. Weights of the gene
networks are shared by all cells, in the same spirit in which actual cells share the same genetic material. Gene networks
are specified by the following ODE model:
dgi
dt = ϕ(ΣjWijgj + bi) + Ii −kigi
(4)
Considering the i-th gene, gi is the expression level, Wij is the regulatory influence of gene j on i, bi determines the
gene transcription rate in absence of regulation, ki is the degradation rate, and Ii is a forcing signal coming from one
of the sensed cell inputs. ϕ is a sigmoid function that ensures positive transcription rates saturating at high input
levels. Local signals sensed by the cell (chemicals, stress, etc.) are fed as input signal to input nodes in the network
(colored green in the diagrams in the main text). All other genes receive no external inputs. The last output gene’s
readout is the division propensity, and the last Nc genes readout the secretion rates of chemicals. In the case where
cellular adhesion is chemically regulated, there are also output genes that readout cadherin concentrations.
II.
THE REINFORCE OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM
A.
Underlying Theory
REINFORCE is a widely used reinforcement learning algorithm that allows to optimize the action policy directly,
in a context where stochastic decisions must be taken. This is the algorithm we use for most of our optimizations,
and below are the main steps in its derivation.
Markov Decision Processes
We assume that our simulation follows a Markov Decision Process (MDP). That is, the probability of a trajectory
τ is the product of the probability of the initial state and the probabilities of each action and state transition along


===== PAGE 17 =====

5
the trajectory. Let τ = (s0, a0, s1, a1, . . . , sT , aT ) represent a trajectory, where st and at are the state and action
(cell division) at time t, respectively. Assume π(at|st) is the policy (the division propensity calculated by the gene
network), P(st+1|st, at) is the state transition probability, and P(s0) is the initial state distribution. The probability
of the trajectory τ is given by:
P(τ) = P(s0)
T
Y
t=0
π(at|st)P(st+1|st, at)
Where:
P(s0) is the probability of the initial state s0
π(at|st) is the probability of taking action at given state st
P(st+1|st, at) is the probability of transitioning to state st+1 given state st and action at.
Policy Gradients Theorem
The goal is to maximize the expected return J(θ), where θ are the parameters of the policy πθ(a|s). The expected
return is defined as:
J(θ) = Eπθ [Gt]
where Gt is the (possibly discounted) return starting from time step t. The expected gradient of the return with
respect to the policy parameters θ can be computed using the log-derivative trick, also known as the REINFORCE
algorithm. The expected return J(θ) is given by:
J(θ) =
X
τ
P(τ)G(τ)
The gradient of the expected return is:
∇θJ = ∇θ
X
τ
P(τ)G(τ) =
X
τ
G(τ)∇θP(τ)
Using the log-derivative trick, ∇θP(τ) can be written as:
∇θP(τ) = P(τ)∇θ log P(τ)
Thus, the expected gradient is:
∇θJ(θ) =
X
τ
P(τ)G(τ)∇θ log P(τ)
Using the definition of MDP given above, the gradient of the expected return with respect to θ can be simplified to
only include the policy πθ:
∇θJ(θ) = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ(a|s)Gt]


===== PAGE 18 =====

6
Monte Carlo Estimation
In practice, the expectation is estimated using Monte Carlo sampling. By sampling trajectories τ = (s0, a0, r0, s1, a1, r1, . . .)
from the policy πθ, the gradient can be approximated as:
∇θJ(θ) ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
T −1
X
t=0
∇θ log πθ(ai
t|si
t)Gi
t
where N is the number of sampled trajectories, and T is the length of each trajectory.
Parameters Update Rule
The REINFORCE algorithm updates the policy parameters θ by gradient ascent (if we are considering the case of
maximizing total rewards):
θ ←θ + η∇θJ(θ)
where η is the learning rate. In order to calculate the actual update, we substitute the Monte Carlo gradient estimate
for the gradient derived above.
Baseline for Variance Reduction
To reduce the variance of the gradient estimate, a baseline function b(st) is introduced, leading to the modified
gradient:
∇θJ(θ) = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ(a|s)(Gt −b(st))]
A common choice for the baseline is the state-value function V π(st), which represents the expected return from state
st. Another common basic technique for variance reduction is to normalize the rewards after each batch of simulations,
resulting in half of the actions being favored and half unfavored on average. We adopt the latter in this work.
B.
Optimization of Cell Divisions
In our simulations, we consider the policy to be the gene regulatory network inside each cell. Cells sense inputs
from the environment and use them to decide how likely they should be to divide next. Notice that a loss applied
naively at the end of the simulation — like for example a measure of distance from a given target — would produce
undefined gradients. Stochastic operations (like sampling a cell for division) do not have a mathematically well-
defined differentiation rule; therefore as soon as the back-propagation procedure encounters such operations, the
whole gradient becomes ill-defined (or zero, in practice in the code). In order to overcome this obstacle, we resort to
techniques like the one presented in the previous section.
Our simulation presents an additional complication with respect to the policy gradient case defined above. Cells
influence the environment not only through their division decisions but also, mainly, through the modulation of
chemical secretion. This creates a long feedback loop connecting secretions at one step to the chemical landscape at
the next step, which in turn influences division decisions. As a consequence, the gradient of a loss applied to cell
division events – like REINFORCE – must be propagated through the environment updates till the very beginning
of the simulation. This makes automatic differentiation algorithms critical for this sort of optimization.
In all our optimizations, we use the Adam optimizer for gradient descent (hyperparameters are listed below).
Reported losses, here and in the main text, are validation losses calculated on a batch of simulations different from
the one used for updating the parameters.


===== PAGE 19 =====

7
a
b
c
1
1
1
2
Loss
Loss
Loss
Epoch
Epoch
Epoch
homotypic 
adhesion molecule
heterotypic
adhesion molecule
activation
inhibition
FIG. S1. Chemical Regulation of Cellular Adhesion. Learned chemical regulation of cellular adhesion guides the assembly
of different spatial cluster arrangements. The top part of the panels show the training loss curves for three different optimization
targets. The insets show the final state of a simulation after the learning, with colors denoting different cell types. The bottom
sections show the learned and pruned gene network; Cad1, Cad2, and Cad3 are the homotypic cadherins of the three cell
types, and Het is the heterotypic cadherin expressed in all cell types. (a) Lattice-like structure. Cells are arranged to minimize
the sum of pairwise distances between heterotypic cells. (b) Lobed structure. Cells minimize the sum of pairwise distances
between homotypic cells. (c) Core-shell structure. Cells are arranged to minimize the distance of cells from a predefined radius,
dependent on their type. The final configuration is here shown as a cross-section to highlight the internal structure.
III.
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
We report in this section on a set of additional experiments and results that we do not include in the main text.
Chemical Regulation of Cellular Adhesion
The differential adhesion hypothesis posits that populations of cells can adopt specific morphologies based on
differences in adhesive strength [5].
During morphogenesis, a cadherin code regulates the spatial organization of
developing tissue [6, 7].
Engineered cellular circuits can use gene regulatory networks to dynamically modulate
adhesion and program self-organization [8]. Here, we show that gene interactions can be learned that use chemical
signaling to modulate homotypic and heterotypic adhesion to achieve a target spatial pattern in a population with
different cell types.
In our model, a population of three cell types is subject to Brownian motion and interacts via a Morse pairwise
potential. The well depth of the potential between a pair of cells is dictated by the concentration of homotypic
and heterotypic “cadherins” in each cell. Each cell type produces its respective homotypic cadherin and a shared
heterotypic cadherin, regulated by chemical signaling. Each cell type utilizes the same gene network, but can only
secrete chemicals and express cadherins of its own type. To achieve a desired spatial organization, we construct three
loss functions based on pairwise distances between cells. For a lattice-like structure, we minimize the sum of pairwise
distances between cells of different types (Fig S1a). To organize the structure into three lobes, we minimize the sum
of pairwise distances between cells of the same type (Fig S1b). To achieve a core-shell structure, we minimize the


===== PAGE 20 =====

8
a
b
c
activation
inhibition
FIG. S2. Elongation. Maximization of the squared sum of the z-coordinates of cells, resulting in vertical elongation in the
optimized cluster. (a) Loss curve for one successful optimization run. On the left the final configuration of a simulation with
randomly initialized parameters, on the right the final state after learning. (b) Visualization of the optimized and pruned gene
network, displaying activation and inhibition interactions that regulate cell behavior during elongation. (c) Two examples of
emerging chemical gradients that are used to guide growth.
distance of each cell to a pre-specified radius, based on the cell type (Fig S1c).
We model cell adhesion in 3D, with a cluster of 60 cells that do not divide. The cluster has three cell types, 3
cell-type specific signalling chemicals and 0 hidden genes. Each cell’s gene regulatory network senses as input only
local chemical concentrations, and outputs the concentration of a homotypic cadherin (controlling the well depth
between the same cell type) and a heterotypic cadherin (controlling the well depth with a different cell type).
The optimization process identifies effective solutions by allowing cells to observe their own type and regulate the
pairwise potential between cell types. For a lattice-like structure, cells up-regulate their heterotypic cadherin and
down-regulate their homotypic cadherin. Conversely, to create a lobed structure, they up-regulate their homotypic
cadherin and down-regulate their heterotypic cadherin. These patterns of homo- and heterotypic adhesion are consis-
tent with observations from cell culture sorting experiments [6]. Although the formation of a lattice and lobe structure
are trivial, achieving a core-shell structure with three cell types requires a more complex regulatory network to achieve
the correct differential adhesion - the inner cells have strong homotypic adhesion, while the outermost cells require
heterotypic adhesion to stick to the second layer of cells. (Fig S1c).
Elongation (Single cell type)
We model the elongation of a single cell type in three dimensions, optimizing the cell cluster to minimize the sum
of squared z-coordinates, thus promoting vertical elongation (Fig. S2a). This contrasts with the previous example by
focusing on a single cell type and incorporating the cells’ ability to sense chemical gradients. Each cell’s gene network
receives as input local chemical concentrations, estimated chemical gradients, cell size, and division propensity (Fig.
S2b). These inputs drive positional information inference through local physical communication. Simulations initiate
with a single cell and proceed until the cluster reaches 120 cells.
Critically, cells autonomously establish or manipulate existing chemical gradients to achieve the global elongated
shape, a feature not explicitly encoded in the optimization objective (Fig.
S2c).
The gene networks evolve to
concentrate cell division primarily at the cluster’s ends. Because the cluster boundary dynamically shifts with cell
division, the gene networks must implement a sophisticated control mechanism to sustain directed growth.
Branching
We simulate the growth of a cluster from a single cell to 130 cells, restricting ourselves to the 2-dimensional case
for computational simplicity. The simulation is initialized with 1 cell in 2D, and run for 129 cell division steps to


===== PAGE 21 =====

9
a
b
c
d
N = 630
N = 130
FIG. S3. Branching. Optimizing growth in a V-shaped reward landscape results in a learned branched structure of the final
cluster. (a) Loss curve for one successful optimization run. On the left, the final configuration of a simulation with randomly
initialized parameters.
On the right, the final state after learning with a visualization of the reward mask (red areas are
associated to penalties, white ones with rewards). (b) Two examples of emerging chemical gradients that are used to guide
growth. (c) Final optimized state after 129 cell divisions, the same number used for the training (top) and with 500 extra cell
divisions. Note the spontaneous branching on the main arms. (d) Loss of the final state after removal, at random, of a fraction
of cells. The red dashed line is the loss associated to the final simulation state before cell removals.
generate a cluster of 130 cells. Simulations are done with 20 chemicals and 50 internal genes. With a similar spirit to
diffusion-based geometry [9], we simulate permeable diffusive boundaries between the cell cluster and the surrounding
implicit medium by connecting boundary cells to a ghost chemical sink node. Gene networks have access to the local
chemical concentrations, estimates of local chemical gradients, their own cell radius and division propensity. They do
not have access to their own absolute spatial coordinates.
To learn more complex branched structures, we construct a position-based shape loss. At each time point, cell
divisions that place cells within the region designating the desired shape are assigned a reward, the others a penalty.
In this case, we impose a V-shaped spatial reward structure (Fig. S3a on the right) augmented with an asymmetry
penalty on the x-coordinate, in order to promote the growth of both arms at the same time. Also in this case, a variety
of chemical patterns emerge in the learned simulation (Fig S3b), and the cluster learns to divide cells primarily at the
tips of the branching structure. Clusters visually acquire a branched shape, even when simulated for 500 cell divisions
more than optimized for. While shape errors clearly emerge, they do mostly in the form of smaller branches that
begin to sprout from the main branched structure (Fig S3c). Furthermore, the learned network displays emergent
regenerative capabilities. After reaching the final branched configuration, we remove a fraction of cells chosen at
random and we allow the cluster grow back to its original size. As shown in Fig S3d, eliminating up to 60% of cells
still results in the regeneration of a branched structure. Even more interestingly, it appears that randomly removing
cell actually promotes error-correction in the regrowth, reaching even slightly better performances in the training loss.


===== PAGE 22 =====

10
IV.
EXPERIMENT DETAILS
Chemical Regulation of Cellular Adhesion
The simulation is initialized with 60 cells and 3 cell types, and done in 3D. Cell positions and identities are
randomly initialized. For the lattice and lobe structures, the cluster consists of equal numbers of each cell type (20
cells each); for optimizing a core-shell structure, the cluster consists of 10 blue cells, 20 yellow cells and 30 red cells.
The simulation is run for 50 time steps, with 200 Brownian relaxation steps between each time step; the temperature
is high to allow for sufficient rearrangement of the system without trapping. No cell division occurs. The simulation
contains 0 internal genes, and each cell type can secrete 3 cell type specific morphogens.
Cadherin.
The system contains Nctype+ 1 cadherins, with each cell able to regulate concentrations of its cell
type specific cadherin (cad1, cad2, etc.), as well as a heterotypic cadherin (het). The gene network takes as input
sensed chemicals and regulates only the concentrations of cadherins. The well depth of the pairwise potential between
cells is calculated as the sum of the concentration of homotypic cadherins (if they are the same cell type) or the sum
of the concentration of heterotypic cadherins (if they are different cell types). This also ensures that the pairwise well
depth matrix is always symmetric. The calculated well depth value is then scaled by a sigmoid to be between .8 and
3.8, ensuring a stable range of values are used for the Morse potential.
Optimization. Since there is no cell division in this simulation, we directly backpropagate through the simulation
without using REINFORCE. To improve the quality of gradients when backpropagating through long simulations,
we ”discount” gradients in the backward pass by a discounting factor of 0.99 - this results in gradients from time
steps closer to the end of the simulation providing a greater contribution to the optimization. Training is done over
a batch of 4 simulations, and the validation loss is averaged over a batch of 64 simulations. Additionally, at each
gradient descent step, we constrain the learned network by setting to zero all outgoing edges from output nodes.
Three different loss functions are utilized. To learn a lobe-like arrangement, the following loss is used:
1
Nt
ΣtΣcell iΣcell j
(
dist(i, j),
if type(i) == type(j)
0,
otherwise
This is the sum of pairwise distances between cells of the same type, averaged over all time steps of the simulation.
Conversely, to attain a lattice-like structure, the sum of pairwise dustances between unlike cell types is minimized:
1
Nt
ΣtΣcell iΣcell j
(
0,
if type(i) == type(j)
dist(i, j),
otherwise
For the core-shell structure, the distance of cells from a predefined radius (based on the cell’s type) with respect to
the center of the core cells is minimized:
C = 1
N1
Σi∈type 1 cells ¯ri
1
Nt
ΣtΣcell i





(dist(i, C) −1)2,
if type(i) == 1
(dist(i, C) −2)2,
if type(i) == 2
(dist(i, C) −3)2,
if type(i) == 3
Here, C is the average position of the core cells, N1is the number or core cells, type(i) is the cell type of cell i, and
dist(i,j) is the Euclidean distance between the positions of cells iand j. To optimize, we used a learning rate of 0.001
for 1000 gradient descent steps with Adam optimizer. The weights of the gene network are not regularized, but the
network is distilled by pruning.
Elongation (Two cell types)
This is the elongation example shown in the main text. The initial state is composed of 15 cells, 10 source cells
and 5 proliferating cells. The simulation is run for 135 cell division events, so the final state has a total of 150 cells.


===== PAGE 23 =====

11
Source cells secrete the chemical factor that diffuses through space. Proliferating cells sense the chemical factor and
use this information to modulate cell division propensity.
Optimization. The loss function is calculated as the sum of the squares of the x-coordinate of the cells. Training is
done on a batch of 4 simulations. We use a learning rate of 0.005 for 1000 gradient descent steps with Adam optimizer.
The weights of the learned gene network are L1-regularized with λ = 1..
Elongation (Single cell type)
The forward simulation is initialized with 1 cell in 3D, and run for 119 cell division steps. The simulation consists
of 10 chemicals and 32 internal genes, and the gene network takes as input sensed chemical concentrations, chemical
gradients, division propensities, and cell radii. Diffusion occurs in a closed system.
Optimization.
The loss function is calculated as the sum of the squares of the z-coordinate of each cell; mini-
mizing this forces the cluster to elongate vertically. Training is done on a batch of 4 simulations, and a batch of 4
simulations is used to evaluate the validation loss. We use a learning rate of 0.001 for 500 gradient descent steps
with Adam optimizer. The weights of the learned gene network are L1-regularized with λ = .1. The weights of the
gene network are initialized to values drawn from a normal distribution with σ = .1. The weights of the learned gene
interaction matrix are pruned (set to zero) if they are below ϵ = 0.9. This threshold is determined by pruning the
learned parameters at various thresholds and measuring the loss of 50 simulations run with pruned parameters (Fig.
IVa).
Branching
Optimization. The loss function is calculated by defining a shape mask that specifies the region of space cells should
occupy to be rewarded. Cells that are within the mask are given a reward of 3.0 and cells that are not are given
a penalty of -1. These values are summed over all cells and an asymmetry penalty is added to prevent cells from
forming just one branch. The asymmetry penalty is given by the absolute value of the sum of the x-coordinates of
cells. We use a learning rate of 0.01 for 500 gradient descent steps with Adam optimizer. The weights of the learned
gene network are L1-regularized with λ = .1. The weights of the gene network are initialized to values drawn from a
normal distribution with σ = 0.1.
Regeneration.
To obtain the regeneration plot shown in Fig S3d, forward simulations are run using optimized
parameters. A fraction f of cells is removed by deleting f ∗N random indices, where N is the total number of cells
in the structure, and a simulation is run for (1 −f) ∗N steps using the partial structure as the initial state. The final
loss after regeneration is averaged for 15 simulations, for various f ∈[0, 1].
Chemical Homeostasis
The simulation is initialized with 20 cells, and run for 100 cell division steps. The initial cells are divided into two
cell types, where each cell type can only secrete one of two chemicals in the simulation. An initial imbalance between
the two cell types is set by assigning 20% of the initial cells to be the first cell type and the remaining to be the
second cell type. The simulation contains 8 internal genes, and the gene network takes as input the sensed chemical
concentrations. Diffusion occurs in a closed system.
In this case each cell type is equipped with a different regulatory network, shared among all cells of the same
type. Each cell type can still only secrete one chemical of the two but sense the concentration of both of them. Fig
IVa showcases gene networks for cell type 1 and 2 obtained from different optimization runs. Out of 20 optimization
runs, 12 converged to the architectures in the top row, the other on one of the other two cases. Notice the consistency
in the discovered architectures, especially of the stronger (bolder) connections. Fig IVb schematically represents the
model optimized in this context.
Optimization. The loss function is calculated as the imbalance in the number of cell types, given by:
Lt = |num type 1 cells −num type 2 cells|


===== PAGE 24 =====

12
Cell Type 2
Cell Type 1
Cell Type 1
sc2
sc1
c1
c2
c1
c2
C1  , C2: genes encoding receptors 
             that sense chemical 1 or 2
Sc1  , Sc2: genes encoding proteins
              that control secretion rate
              of chemical 1 or 2
Cell Type 2
Optimization Run 1
Optimization Run 2
Optimization Run 3
activation
inhibition
a
b
FIG. S4. Chemical Regulation of Homeostasis with Cell Type Specific Networks. (a) Gene network architectures for
each cell type (on columns) obtained from different optimization runs (on rows). Green nodes are sensory inputs (i.e. sensed
chemical concentrations, while red nodes are outputs (secretion of the cell type specific chemical and division probability). (b)
Schematic representation of the model we optimize over.
We used a learning rate of 0.01 for 400 gradient descent steps with Adam optimizer. The weights of the learned
gene network are L1-regularized with λ = .1. To have the untrained state maintain the initial imbalance of the
cell types in the generated structure, the weights of the gene network are initialized to very low values, resulting
in a homogeneous division propensity that could only be broken by learning how to chemically regulate division to
maintain equal numbers of cell types.


===== PAGE 25 =====

13
a
Elongation
b
Branching
c
Chemical Homeostasis
FIG. S5.
Elongation, Branching and Chemical Regulation of Homeostasis.
Final losses for a range of pruning
thresholds shown on the left for gene network learned for (a) Elongation, (b) Branching, and (c) Chemical Homeostasis. Losses
are averaged over 50 simulations, and shaded area shows one standard deviation. On the right, histograms comparing the
distribution of final losses from the untrained and trained models for each of the three cases; there is a clear separation of the
trained model from the untrained.


===== PAGE 26 =====

14
Mechanical Control of Cell Proliferation
The forward simulation starts from one cell and is run for 200 time steps. Throughout the simulation, an external
field is established over the cells to mimic the effect of a growth factor gradient. The value of the field scales as 1/r2,
with r being the distance to the center of the cluster. At every cell division step, the division propensity calculated
by the gene network is scaled by the value of this field:
di = di ∗
1
2 + 0.4 ∗r2
where di is the division propensity of cell i. This emulates the effect of a growth factor gradient - cells closer to the
center are more likely to divide than cells closer to the edge. The simulation is run with 2 chemicals and 4 hidden
genes, with the gene network being able to sense the cell’s chemical concentration, chemical gradients, and mechanical
stress. Mechanical relaxation occurs for a fewer number of steps in this simulation than in the other examples to
prevent rearrangements from dissipating stress. Diffusion occurs with heuristic boundary conditions.
Optimization.
Optimization is performed with a batch of 4 simulations for training, and a batch of 16 simula-
tions for evaluation of the validation loss. We use a learning rate of 0.001 for 300 gradient descent steps with Adam
optimizer. The weights of the learned gene network are L1-regularized with λ = .1. The loss function is the coefficient
of variation of division propensities at the final time step. This optimization worked best without a REINFORCE
gradient estimate - information from the last time step is enough to learn a mechanism. The weights of the gene
network are initialized to zero so that the initial cluster grows as prescribed by the growth factor gradient.
To evaluate the nature of the learned mechanism, inputs to the trained model are ablated, by replacing the weights
of the gene network corresponding to a specific input to zeros. In this way, we ablated chemicals, chemical gradients
and stress as inputs, finding that ablating stress results in markedly decreased performance of the mechanism (Fig
S6c). We additionally tested the learned mechanism on other kinds of fields (as described in the main text) and saw
that the distribution of unscaled division propensities seem to match the distribution of stress buildup in the cluster
(Fig S6d).


===== PAGE 27 =====

15
a
b
c
Mechanical
 stress
Divrate/ﬁeld
Power Law
Exponential
Two Peaks
Oﬀ Center
d
e
FIG. S6. Mechanical Control of Cell Proliferation. (a) Final costs of 300 forward simulations ran with trained parameters
and untrained parameters. (b) Final costs of 300 forward simulations ran with trained parameters, ablating one of the input
features to the gene network. Ablation is performed by setting outgoing edges from the desired feature to zero. Ablations show
that mechanical stress is the most important feature used by the gene network to regulate division rates. (c) Visualizations of
forward simulations run with trained parameters, but with a different shape of field than the one trained on. Top row shows the
mechanical stress accumulation under different kinds of field, which follows the prescribed field. Bottom row shows the division
rate unscaled by the field - the learned values weakly follow the pattern of stress accumulation. (d) Pruning plot showing final
costs for various pruning thresholds of network weights.


===== PAGE 28 =====

16
V.
SCALING OF OPTIMIZATION PERFORMANCE WITH MODEL COMPLEXITY
Over-parametrized deep networks have shown a remarkable generalizability in learning target functions. In a similar
vein, we preliminarily investigated how our optimization performance scales with the complexity of the regulatory
network in our cells – i.e, the number of secreted morphogens and the number of interacting genes (Fig S7). We restrict
ourselves for simplicity to the 2D case of growing elongated and branched structures. In learning the decision-making
circuits required for cells to grow into a pre-specified shape (either an elongated cluster or a branched ”V-shaped”
structure), a lower validation loss is reached by increasing the number of morphogens each cell can locally communicate
with. The rate of success of optimizations - the fraction of optimizations that are able to successfully create the desired
shape - also increases with the number of morphogens. Without a sufficient number of morphogens, however, none
of the optimizations can learn a successful decision-making network to create the desired shape. In the case of the
V-shape, increasing the number of interacting genes did not have a pronounced effect. Interestingly, for the case of the
elongated cluster, increasing the number of genes helped learn successful mechanisms in systems with low numbers
of morphogens. In both cases, a sufficient number of both morphogens and genes is necessary to learn a successful
mechanism. These findings indicate a minimal complexity required to build shapes and an interesting tradeoff between
the quantity of communication signals (number of morphogens) versus the complexity of the local communication
network (number of interacting genes).
FIG. S7. Scaling of Optimization Performance with Model Complexity. (a) Scaling of validation loss and success
rates for elongation. Losses are collected for 10 optimizations run from a different random seed for each condition. Training is
done over 500 gradient descent steps and a batch of 8 simulations. (b) Scaling plots for V-shape case. Losses are collected for
10 optimizations run from a different random seed for each condition. Training is done over 300 gradient descent steps and a
batch of 8 simulations.


===== PAGE 29 =====

17
TABLE I. Definition of Notation
Notation
Definition
T
number of timesteps
N
number of cells in final state
n
number of cells in initial state
Dim
dimension of cell property
R
cell radii
Nc
number of chemicals in system
Nctype
number of celltypes in system
Nt
number of timesteps
¯ri
position of cell i
di
division propensity of cell i
¯gi
gene concentration vector of cell i
ck(¯ri)
chemical kconcentration at position ¯ri
D
diffusion coefficients
S
secretion rates
K, ki
degradation rates
Wij
interaction weight of gene j regulating gene i
Ii
input signal to gene i
[1] S. S. Schoenholz and E. D. Cubuk, Jax m.d. a framework for differentiable physics, in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, Vol. 33 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2020).
[2] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas,
S. Wanderman-Milne, and Q. Zhang, JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs (2018).
[3] R. G. Endres and N. S. Wingreen, Accuracy of direct gradient sensing by single cells, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 105, 15749 (2008), publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
[4] T. W. Hiscock, Adapting machine-learning algorithms to design gene circuits, BMC Bioinformatics 20, 214 (2019).
[5] M. S. Steinberg, Does differential adhesion govern self-assembly processes in histogenesis? Equilibrium configurations and
the emergence of a hierarchy among populations of embryonic cells, Journal of Experimental Zoology 173, 395 (1970),
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/jez.1401730406.
[6] T. Y.-C. Tsai, M. Sikora, P. Xia, T. Colak-Champollion, H. Knaut, C.-P. Heisenberg, and S. G. Megason, An adhesion code
ensures robust pattern formation during tissue morphogenesis, Science 370, 113 (2020), publisher: American Association
for the Advancement of Science.
[7] M. Bao, J. Cornwall-Scoones, E. Sanchez-Vasquez, A. L. Cox, D.-Y. Chen, J. De Jonghe, S. Shadkhoo, F. Hollfelder,
M. Thomson, D. M. Glover, and M. Zernicka-Goetz, Stem cell-derived synthetic embryos self-assemble by exploiting cadherin
codes and cortical tension, Nature Cell Biology 24, 1341 (2022), publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[8] S. Toda, W. L. McKeithan, T. J. Hakkinen, P. Lopez, O. D. Klein, and W. A. Lim, Engineering synthetic morphogen
systems that can program multicellular patterning, Science (New York, N.Y.) 370, 327 (2020).
[9] D. Iber and D. Menshykau, The control of branching morphogenesis, Open Biology 3, 130088 (2013).
